This last type of publishing cash flow is linked to the last part of the copyright — creating a derivative work based on the composition. In essence, every time someone wants to use the composition as a part of any other type of content, whether it’s a TV show, a movie, an ad or a radio show, they need to get permission from the copyright owners. That process is generally known as sync licensing. 

There are two main conceptual points of difference between sync licensing and mechanicals and public performance royalties. First, sync agreements always target a specific piece of music. Unlike performance royalties, covered by blanket licenses and predetermined mechanical fees, syncs are always directly negotiated by music users and copyright owners (or their corresponding representatives). In other words, it costs the same to play Drake vs. unknown artists on the radio. If you’d want to sync those songs to an ad, however, Drake will cost you about a million times more. 

Second, syncs have to be negotiated with both composition and sound recording owners — which means that licensors have to go through both songwriters’ and recording artists’ representatives. Synchronization cash flow is shared between the recording and publishing sides of the music business, turning it into a unique subset of the music business. That’s why we’ve covered the sync industry in detail in a separate article on the Mechanics of Sync Licensing — so check it out if you want to know more about ins and outs of sync industry. 

Those are the three primary cash flows of the publishing business. Theoretically, this list can be broadened by adding “print royalties” — due when someone publishes the song’s lyrics — but those are really “small potatoes” compared to sync, mechanical, and public performance cash. With that out of the way, let’s get real. What do music publishers do? 

The Role of Music Publishers
On paper, a music publisher is a person or an organization that is authorized to license the copyrighted use of a particular musical work. Publishers sign contracts with songwriters to manage their composition rights and maximize the cash flows mentioned above — and the first step is registering the copyright with CMOs.